Hello everyone! In this tutorial we will teach our weapon to shoot, but first, let's open the rifle mesh
and figure out how we can get the muzzle coordinate. Socket will help us with this.
We used the socket as an anchor to attach our weapon, and now we can use it to mark the
muzzle of our rifle. Add a socket to the skeleton tree. By default, it is located at the zero of the local
coordinate system of our weapon. We name our socket MuzzleSocket in the details panel.
Muzzle translates to muzzle. Using the keys on the keyboard W, E, R, we can change the
editing modes: movement, rotation and scale. We move our socket approximately to the place where we want
to fire a shot, that is, closer to the muzzle. We can also use various projections.
At the top in the upper corner is the projection selection panel. That is, for example, we can choose a projection from above.
Or projection from left, right, bottom, top and make sure our socket is correctly aligned on all axes.
In the details panel, let's round up our numbers: at x = 0, at y = -10 and at z = 80.
So we've created a socket that we can access from the code and actually fire a shot from that point.
First, let's draw a line along which our weapon will shoot.
We create an additional function in our weapon. Let's call it MakeShot. This function will contain all the logic of the shot.
We can use the Fire function for these purposes, but looking ahead, I can say
that we will have timer shooting, so it is better to separate this logic into a separate function.
Plus, for example, if your weapon type is a Winchester, then you will need to
fire several shots at the same time, so we add a function call to the Fire function.
Let's include the header files that we need in this tutorial. These are Engine / World.h
and DrawDebugHelpers. We used this header file - we drew debug spheres.
And now we need this header file to draw a line.
Let's add a check for WeaponMesh to BeginPlay so that we don't write if every time. We will use
WeaponMesh to get a socket. Let's go to the MakeShot function and first of all we will check
that we have a world. If the world pointer is null, then we immediately exit this function.
First of all, let's get the socket transform. We need both the location
and rotation of the socket. Therefore, we create a local variable SocketTransform.
The socket we created is in the WeaponMesh.
The function that receives the socket transformation is
called GetSocketTransform. This function has two parameters.
The first one is the name of the socket, for which we create a stub - MuzzleSocketName.
And the second parameter is responsible for the coordinate system in which we want to receive our socket.
We leave the default value, which corresponds to the world coordinate system.
Add a property for the name of our socket, which we call MuzzleSocket.
We'll need a few variables. The first is the point where the shot starts. Let's call the variable TraceStart.
It will be of type FVector and we will write the socket position into it, that is, we will take location from the transformation.
The second variable will be of the same type FVector. Let's call it ShootDirection.
In this variable, we will write a unit vector of the direction along which the weapon is fired.
To do this, we need to get the rotation of our socket. Let's get it through the GetRotation function.
This function returns the quaternion. In addition to FRotator, UE also uses the FQuat type,
which is a quaternion by day. If you are unfamiliar with this concept,
then there is nothing wrong with that. We will not go deep into this topic. It is more convenient for us to use this type here
, because the quaternion has a convenient function called GetForwardVector.
If we press F12 on this function, we will see that this function rotates the rotation vector along the x-axis.
Thus, you and I know the point from which we will shoot and the direction. Let's create a
third variable called TraceEnd - this is the end point of our shot.
To get it, we need to postpone the direction vector from the starting point,
that is, add ShootDirection to the TraceStart variable. This vector is single. Let's multiply it
by some number large enough. We make a variable stub for this value, as usual.
Let's call it TraceMaxDistance. We make this variable property. It will be of type float.
Let the default value be 1500 units, or 1500 centimeters, or 15 meters,
that is, we will shoot at this distance.
So there is a start point, an end point. We can draw a line with you.
To do this, we will use a function called DrawDebugLine.
She has several arguments. The first is the world. We pass GetWorld there, which returns a pointer to UWorld.
The next variable is LineStart, that is, the point from which the line starts. We pass our TraceStart variable there.
Next is the end point. Pass TraceEnd. The next parameter is color. We will draw red lines FColor :: Red The next parameter determines
whether this line will be drawn for some time or permanently.
We're passing in false, which means we don't want the line to stay forever.
The next parameter is the number of seconds for how long the line will be drawn.
We put 3 seconds. Leave the next DepthPriority at 0. This is the order in which the depth is drawn. He is not interesting to
us now. Specify the Thickness parameter 3 - this is the thickness of the line. That is, we will have 3 units.
And that's all. Let's start the editor. Let's see how it looks. Click play.
We see that we have slightly modified socket. We have a wrong rotation. Shooting is at 90 degrees.
Let's fix it up. Open up the mesh of the weapon. The Forward vector corresponds to the X direction,
that is, the red line. Let's rotate it around the Y-axis 90 degrees.
The X-axis is now pointing in the correct direction. In principle, this is enough, but let's also tweak the
rotation around the X-axis so that the Z-axis is facing up. Change the X rotation to -90.
Socket rotation is now set correctly. Let's take a look. The lines are drawn correctly:
in the direction of the bullet's exit from the muzzle. Now let's see how we can get information about the intersection of
any objects in our game world by a given ray .
From a mathematical point of view, we need to find the intersection of our line with the objects that are on the scene. In our case, it is enough to find the
object that our segment will cross first. In the engine, in the box, there are many functions
that allow you to find such geometric intersections. We will use one of them.
Most of the functionality is found in the UWorld object. Therefore, we get to point to it
using GetWorld and the function that we need is called LineTraceSingleByChannel.
It returns information about the intersection with the very first object that will meet on the path of our segment,
if any. The first parameter is a structure that is returned by reference, it contains all the
information about the intersection. It is of type FHitResult. We pass a non-existent variable.
The next parameter is the starting point of our segment, so we pass TraceStart. Further, the end
point is TraceEnd. The fourth parameter is CollisionChannel. With it, our trace will filter out
all objects on the scene and our trace will work only with those objects that block this channel.
All other objects will be ignored. We will use the ECC_Visibility channel
for our trace . Leave the rest of the function parameters by default. We are not interested in them now.
We create our local variable of type FHitResult named HitResult.
This object is passed by reference, and in case of a successful trace, all information of interest to us will be written to it.
Press F12 on FHitResult. This type is a structure.
The fields of this structure contain comprehensive information about the intersection.
The structure records the time of intersection, the point of intersection, the normal, the pointer to the actor with which the intersection occurred, and so on.
Also, our function returns boolean, that is, it returns true if there was an intersection and false if there was no intersection.
Therefore, we can find out about the intersection through the return value of the function, or there is a
second way how this can be done. The HitResult structure will also contain information about whether there was an
intersection or not. The variable responsible for this is called bBlockingHit. If the value of
this variable is true, then we hit something, and if it is false, then the intersection did not happen.
Let's draw a sphere at the intersection point. For this we use the DrawDebugSphere function.
The first parameter is a pointer to the world, the second is the center of the sphere. The center of the sphere should be
at the intersection point. The HitResult variable that stores this value is called ImpactPoint.
The next parameter is the radius. Let's make our sphere small. Let's indicate 10 units.
The number of segments is 24. Let the color also be red.
Next, we pass false.
And let our sphere draw for five seconds. Launch the editor.
Let's check the CollisionChannel of our character. To do this, open its blueprint.
Select the capsule component in the component tree and go to the details panel. In the Collision section, our CollisionPreset
is called Pawn. Select Custom from the list. This allows the values ​​to be edited.
And set TraceResponse for Visibility to Block. If the TraceResponse for Visibility is Overlap or Ignore, then our
trace simply won't work. We start shooting and when the character hits a collision, we draw spheres.
Spheres are also displayed when hitting our steps. TraceResponse for Visibility is also set to Block.
The basic logic for shooting works, but such shooting mechanics are unnatural for computer games.
We need to make the bullet fly to the place where our sight is directed.
To do this, we need to trace directly from the player's camera.
This is what we are going to do now. By the way, the shooting logic that we have now implemented will work fine in virtual reality,
because the pistol will be in our hand and it will be natural.
Let's see how we can access the camera in our weapon class. First, let's include two header files: a
character and a controller. We will access the user's camera through the controller class,
so our first task is to get a pointer to the controller object.
Actors, like components, have the concept of Owner, that is, the owner of this actor.
Therefore, you and I can do the same thing as in the components.
Let's create a local variable Player and cast to the ACharacter class of the pointer
that the GetOwner function returns. We create components inside the actors, so their Owner
is determined automatically. For actors, you need to explicitly indicate the owner of this particular actor.
Go to the weapon component class. The moment we spawn a weapon, we have the
opportunity to indicate the owner of our weapon. We can specify it through FActorSpawnParameters
when we call the SpawnActor function. You can check it yourself. We will do this simply by
calling the SetOwner function on CurrentWeapon. The owner of the weapon is the same actor that owns the weapon component,
that is, we can call GetOwner, or we can directly pass the Character pointer.
Now the GetOwner function of the weapon will return a pointer to our character.
We check that the Player is non-zero, if it is equal to nullptr, then we immediately exit the function.
The ACharacter class has a pointer to the controller. The presence of this pointer
is generally logical, because ACharacter objects are mainly controlled by someone. We create a local variable Controller
and call the character function called GetController. This function is template.
In the template parameter, you need to specify the type of controller. We are specifying our base class APlayerController.
We also check for a null pointer.
The function that returns the position of the camera and orientation in space is called GetPlayerViewPoint.
This function has access to the PlayerCameraManager class,
which is a global class for managing cameras. And already from it, a pointer
to the character's camera is obtained . We do not consider some points in detail,
otherwise the length of the course will be very long. Therefore, for anyone interested, I recommend that you look
at the insides of this function yourself . The function has two output parameters by reference: this is the position of the camera
and the rotation of the camera. Let's pass the ViewLocation and ViewRotation variables that don't exist yet.
We create the given local variables. ViewLocation is of type FVector and ViewRotation is of type FRotator.
We now have information about our camera and we can rewrite our trace.
Let's assign the variable TraceStart = ViewLocation, that is, the starting point of trace is the position of the camera.
And we can get the direction from ViewRotation. The FRotator class has a helper function
called Vector. It works similarly to the GetForwardVector function of the quaternion.
TraceEnd does not change for us, because it depends on the starting point and on the direction.
Let's adjust the rendering of the shot line. Move DrawDebugLine under the hit branch. We must
draw the line not from the position of the camera, but also from the muzzle, so we change the TraceStart
to the position of our socket, that is, SocketTransform.GetLocation (), and the end point in case of a hit is our ImpactPoint.
Therefore, we change TraceEnd to HitResult.ImpactPoint. Separately, let's draw a line in the else branch,
that is, if we haven't got anywhere. Copy DrawDebugLine. We insert. The starting point is also from the barrel,
that is, SocketTransform.GetLocation (), and the final one is TraceEnd. Let's see what we've got.
We start the game. Trace goes from the camera and therefore we get to the place where our green sight points.
The shooting angle looks a little strange because the character's body does not rotate up and down.
We will correct this a little later. Now let's see this thing.
Open the character's blueprint. Select the capsule component and let's temporarily resize the capsule.
This can be done in the Shape category and set some value for the radius of the capsule.
We start the game. Also open up a console and enter "show collision".
We shoot at the enemy.
Our trace works correctly with the capsule, but it looks a little ridiculous, because we would like to go
directly to the character's mesh. Let's undo the CollisionPreset changes in the capsule component
so that the Visibility is set to Ignore. And in the component of the skeleton of the mesh,
change the CollisionPreset. Select Custom and set Visibility to Block.
That is, the trace for the capsule will be ignored, but not for the mesh. Checking. We shoot at the character
and the red spheres are displayed directly on the mesh.
Additionally, we can verify this by once again displaying collisions.
It is now clearly visible that the capsule is being ignored. We shoot between the legs of the character and if we hit, then only the mesh.
We have two problems: one of them is that we can hit ourselves, for example, like this. We will fix this now.
And there is a second problem. Let's first return the capsule to its original form.
Let's undo the changes to the radius. The problem is that we can hit
the enemy character even when we are behind him, that is, we have a trace from the camera triggered and we get into the enemy's mesh.
We will not fix this at the moment, you can try to do it yourself.
One option is to check that the angle between the trace and the direction from the muzzle is sharp.
Let's fix hitting ourselves. This can be done through an additional parameter of the trace function.
It is of type FCollisionQueryParams. Let's create a variable of this type.
Let's pass this object directly to the trace function. FCollisionQueryParams is a structure
and we are interested in a function called AddIgnoredActor. This function takes a pointer to an actor
and adds it to the array of actors that we want to ignore in trace.
We pass a pointer to our owner, that is, to character. Thus, line trace
will ignore it. Finally, as a bonus, let's draw out the skeleton bone we hit.
Copy the log. We insert into the branch where we hit.
We write "bone% s" The
information about the bone of the skeleton is in the HitResult variable called BoneName. It is of type FName,
so we convert it to FString using the ToString function and don't forget the * operator. We compile the project.
We open the log. Click play. We check that we do not get into ourselves now - our character is ignored.
We shoot at the enemy and various bones of the skeleton are printed in the log. With this information, for example,
you can make a headshot or different damage for different parts of the body and if, for example, we shoot
at some other objects, we will see that None is displayed in the log, that is, we have no information about the bones.